It all contributes towards your health equity goals?
I'm not sure that's in our rematch, is it? No.
Oh, they're using publicly funded medication.
Does that in any way contribute, contribute to, um, your,
your health equity goals? Well,
Prob possibly indirectly,
and this, I qualify this as being somewhat speculative
and that by funding cancer medication to be delivered,
administered in a private hospital, um, you
would possibly take off some
of the pressure on the public services,
which means the waiting lists would not grow
and disadvantage those who access public hospital services
because they cannot, for reasons of inequity
afford private health insurance.
But that is as good as I could go with that answer.
And we've got our first one.
So our first one is, um, our first cancer medicine has been,
um, just in the last couple of weeks, isn't, is now able
to be administered in the private setting by the way that
that private student has to pay
for the actual administration.
So they might not have to pay the drug
gets, the drug is funded.
But actually, you know, the, um, administration's not
Supplementary on, Supplementary
On that. Um,
in the course of the decision that was taken, um,
to fund advanced medicines in private hospitals,
give any advice to the minister on the, um,
on the, uh, benefits of that approach,
on the financial benefits of that approach.
Um, we've certainly had given advice
to the minister's office.
I'm looking at Michael to try
and, um, um, all,
All advise channeled through the Ministry of Health.
So the ministry provided advice
Ministers, and I'm aware
that most insurance policies will cover
the cost of the cancer.
It is funded by Farm Act.
So was there any effort to look at the additional benefit
that comes from, um, the decision to fund
Brooks and PRI administered in private hospitals?
Yes, from my recollection of the advice that was,
I think is the minister pointed out continuity of care
and also I think they looked at, um, workforce
Impact. Okay. So
I understand the continuity
of care is a different argument, but the, uh, are you
therefore saying that it's acknowledged in this advice
that there isn't much additional benefit in terms
of drug access
because the, um, uh, uh,
pharmaceutical, I'm sorry.
The, um, insurance,
insurance company would've covered it anyway.
I can't recall have
The exact, it would seem a very relevant thing to
cover off, because
that is my understanding that that's the case.
And therefore this is mostly
subsidizing the insurance industry.
Just as Michael says, it's the Ministry of Health
that gives policy advice to the minister.
And they might ask us for some facts and things,
but we wouldn't be, um, giving that advice directly.
Primary. Yeah. Good.
Um, and I couldn't get this question is, it's up in the back
and forth about health technology assessment.
So we're back to, okay. Uh, back to that, if that's okay.
Um, I do understand
that there are questions about how
to better improve health technology assessments
that you touched on in the previous part of the session.
And, um, how, what progress
have you made in the two, two years
towards answering those questions?
So for some, and certainly, I mean, Natalie,
you can probably speak to it, but we've got, um, Adrian
and the team here as well that are
working so closely with it.
You know, one things we've been trialing has been, um,
fast tracking some of the lower risk.
So, and then the other things that we are, um,
certainly looking at is the same with Med Safe,
which is the, um, what do they rule of two.
Um, so in that respect, if it's, you know,
surely if it's being funded in Australia
and it's been funded in Canada
and it's been funded in the uk, do we have to go
through all of efficacy?
We have to go through some, 'cause we're a different
population with different needs
and different, um, inequities.
But do we have to go through the whole thing?
So already some of that is sort of being trial. And if
I could just clarify that
before you pass off the, um, uh,
that's a different description of the rule of two
that I've heard previously.
I've heard it in relation to regulation. Yeah.
Are you suggesting it in relation to funding? No.
Well, those country's about much richer than us,
Our technology as assessment.
So not, um, but yeah,
just in the technology assessment side, do we have to go
through all of the same?
Well, it's a question. It's not enough and
Regulation. 'cause MedSec
does regulation, you're correct. Yeah.
Um, but there's also the question of do we have
to assess the technology using standard health economic
tools such as ca you know, cost utility analysis, um,
do we have to do it again when an East
door neighbor's just done it?
So, you know, putting in
I understand. Thank you. Thanks.
That makes it clear. See,
That's why you bring,
Uh, I appreciate, I appreciate the answer.
And, um, the, this issue around how
to incorporate other benefits, um, uh, that aren't
captured in the, um, approach that pharma has been using
until now, what is the process to bring this question
to a decision point?
Because again, that's another issue
that's really interesting
and we've been discussing it
through since the government's been formed.
How, how will how you reach a decision? We are
Gonna get, have to keep proof of concept.
So in some respects.
So at the moment we don't collect all the right data across
health, you know what I mean?
Like, so that's not just pharma, that's wider than,
you know, um, it's, it's with all respect,
easier with work and income.
They know if they've come off a benefit, they know
how long they're off for, they know whether
or not, so actually it's quite quantifiable.
Do we, so are we collecting the kind of information
that says we are gonna be making presumptions?
You know, and, and because there will be an element of that
and you, so we've got the right formula.
We are checking it at the moment.
We are testing it at the moment, we are putting it forward
to ministers as to this is
what the current evidence shows us, this is what we,
what we expect the outcome to be.
Um, but we will have to be collecting that information
and going, yes, we were right,
or we thought it would save a hundred million dollars
actually and only saved 60 million, you know,
because of this either unintended
or a different set of consequences.
So the answer is, we, we just do not have, you know,
does, did that carer go back to work?
Because the pa you know, like collecting that kind
of information, that's gonna be really interesting
and really challenging. Um, yeah.
And, um, so I appreciate that you're trying
to see if we get better information,
can we make better decisions?
And to some, some extent
that only helps you allocate the money you already have in
our current, uh, current framework.
And just, uh, interested in whether
or not you are exploring, um, how you could reallocate funds
outside the pharmaceutical, um, budget.
Uh, were to be shown to be a better use of funds.
That's a decision for ministers.
Oh, but have a go. You know, I wanna,
I'm not going to, um, it really, that really is a, um,
you know, that that's a
government decision, but, you know, yeah.
I mean that is kind of the model. If you're saving money
somewhere else, then how do you get a piece of it?
But it's, it's not for us to make that call.
I'm good, Mr. Chair.
I have a primary, um, it is World AIDS Day
and a couple of us are wearing the ribbons to
commemorate those who have passed away
and also those with lived experience of HIV.
And this morning at breakfast,
we were hearing about the undetectable
and untransmissable, um, campaign, the U for U,
which the ministry is broadly signed up for.
So what I'm trying to ascertain here is
how joined our system is.
We know that, uh, we are one of the lucky countries
where antiretrovirals are funded
for our HIV positive community,
but they're in probably a rare group of medications that
after some time may not work for some individuals.
And we know that the choice of, um, medicines, uh, is not as
replete as in some other jurisdictions to reach that,
that zero transmission of 2030.
Some of those people
who access antiretrovirals currently are going to need
to change their regimes.
I'm interested to ask on their behalf, uh, what is the,
what is the criteria
or the strategy around dealing with those types
of medications where they may be efficacious
and then they need to be changed,
particularly when there there is a public campaign
that seems to be supported by the Ministry of Health.
I feel like we're all looking at Adrian.
Yeah. How's that?
Um, and you might also speak to that widened access,
which includes the HIV decision,
because you could speak to that better.
We are joined up
and you will have recently seen that we, um,
consults on widening access to which are the medicines.
And part of that is to allow people to collect all
of the medicines at once
to help them process improve adherence.
And the other part of that about making it easier for people
to access medicines is something
that we are working on a little bit further in terms
of new medicines.
It's all part of horizon scanning.
It's all part of making sure
that we're hearing from clinicians,
we're hearing from the consumer groups, from ministry,
from Health New Zealand about what are the new treatments
that are coming down the pipeline
and how are we going to assist them
and, um, manage them when they reach out.
Just two further sets, if I may.
So going back to the points that were raised by Dr.
Al, um, in terms of something like the U for U campaign
where there is a kind of underpinning of support.
Do you see that, um, or,
or what is the level of outreach that you would expect
to do compared to other medications to ensure
that there is access to that, the ARBs?
The second part of that question is, do you see
that the social invest approach might change the ability
for there to be a, a nimble response?
And I'm thinking here particularly just
as this very niche issue of where someone is on medications
and worked and then for some reason they don't be,
that they stop being effective
and they need to go to a new regime
that may not be accessible in New Zealand.
Do you Yeah, I, I can answer,
I guess I can have it go at that question at a high level
because it's not my subject matter expertise.
No, and I appreciate that. It's just being more really
Relevant. I, I think just
coming back
and I'd like to acknowledge World Aids stay too,
and the fact that we have antiretrovirals as a clinician
who lived through the initial sort of new cases that came,
um, uh, where we have a group, um, uh, such
as our HIV patients who are on medication, I think we have
to make, it would be our policy
or our, our business to, to reach into those
who represent those communities, um,
with specific health needs who may not be willing
or confident or able to come forth, uh, publicly.
And so there are a number of foundations
that something we can go through to specifically with that,
um, um, matter that you referred to about
what will I do when my medication no longer works for me?
Because I think that is really, really critical.
We see it in some other medications as well.
Um, but for HIV,
the the ramifications are more than just your survival,
it's your relationships and how you function in life.
Whether a social investment, um, um,
approach could be TI we haven't thought of that.
I don't, I don't believe the team's thought of
that specifically, but it's an interesting,
um, it's an interesting
Position. And I just
kind of add to that, you know,
our outreach is so much better.
Our engagement when we are looking at something,
we're talking to 'em before we even start engaging as to
how do you want us to engage and is there's something else.
And, you know, to the point that we'll do, you know, zoom
or teams calls so that, so
that the wider community can get on and have access.
And they don't all have to sit there
and fill out, you know, a hundred forms for us
to be getting engagement feedback.
But we also talk, and Margaret
and I in particular talk about this quite a lot.
So we, you know, when it comes to advocating
for certain medicines,
and I'm certainly not doing anything around,
but you know, we can't just listen to the loudest voices
or the most organized
or, you know, we still have to be true to a model.
Um, and true to New Zealanders that, you know, um,
bless the advocacy and have changed lives.
So I am not at all, um, being disrespectful of,
of anyone that does that out there.
But as an organization,
we have a responsibility to be listening to all
Research. Absolutely. And I
guess that's why I prefaced the question
with the fact that the Ministry of Health itself seems
to have underpinned in its HIV action plan, this, uh, idea
of the untransmissable undetectable wrong way
around goal for 2030.
And, and how that kind of correlates with the job you do,
given that you also need to be independent.
And I wasn't referring to HIV v to be,
I was doing a broader and just didn't wanna offend. Sorry,
I'll take that broader.
Yeah. Um, so, so you often hear people saying,
my meds was working really well,
then they would change whether it was supply chain issue
or that particular med, uh,
medicine was no longer being produced or whatever.
What, what, um, no,
What Work are you doing around that?
So that those consumers of that particular medicine,
and there's very, there's been various over the last few
years, um, feel that they have their voice heard in terms
of, well, this one's not working
for me as well as the last one.
Yeah. And so, um,
the team can speak much better than me to this.
Um, but I've asked these questions many times
and particularly over, you know, um,
a year ago when we were looking at HRT and things.
Yeah. And, um, uh, I bet Adrian give you the stat,
but, um, hundreds are changed every year.
Hundreds. Right. And that's not us.
That's, um, so it might be price based, it might be
that we're in negotiations.
It might be. Um, and so, and actually I rang you one day
and went, oh, and, um, and Dr.
Margaret went, there's always gonna be changes, Paula,
and some people are gonna be unhappy with it.
Now that doesn't mean that we don't listen.
And actually the HRT patches was a great example
that they actually had a valid reason as
to why they worked better for some women.
Um, and that unease was unnecessary.
So we learned a lot from that as, as far as consultation
and Adrian heads that work so she can talk to it.
But there were, we,
We changed our processes in response to that in terms
of adding in an extra additional step with our
and annual tender process where we now actively consult
with people who may be by brain changes that are a result
of our tendering process.
So we reach out to all of the clinical and consumer groups.
We've got as part process now, which was something
that we hadn't done in the past,
but we really heard, um, as part
of the estradiol patch brand changes,
that we hadn't listened to people, we hadn't breach them,
we hadn't got their feedback,
and that we needed to do better,
and we needed to change our processes
to make sure we could hear them. And
Because how many, sorry, do you put out in that list of,
of, of, um, asking for, um, that you,
that you might be going to tender for how many?
Oh, hundreds. Hundreds.
Like, I think the ones with the HR with, um, was like a,
a 440, I want to say I'm making
that number up of one, I think Yeah.
Around from the top of my head. That's how many.
Now that doesn't mean all of them will change. Mm.
So I don't wanna frighten everyone,
but you know, a, there's a lot of reasons why.
And to be fair, there was a pretty swift change Yes.
Um, in response to the public outcry around
Those pieces. Trust me,
we heard it. Yeah.
Which is great. You know, that's great to see
that there was that agility inside the organization. Now,
I think the other thing that the team certainly at
that's been re reinforced for me is we've put additional,
uh, resources into engagement, which includes,
say when we made changes to A DHD medications
because of supply shortages, education sessions, webinars,
to really help people understand
and also make sure they use the new medicines better.
So in addition to the consultation,
there's an additional engagement education component as well
that we hope will help some of those challenges. Right.
Because e even, um, even the packaging changing Yes.
Is enough to frighten some people, and we get that,
but we don't always control that
Either. Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you. Okay.
We've got, I did have one
of the primary had a primary, yeah.
Yes. Can I roll it then? I've got Isha for a primary.
You mentioned before Paula, about, um, you've used ai.
Can you talk about how you're using ai?
What does it look like? What's the, it was Natalie
That was Natalie. What
was it? Natalie, you'd be pleased that I'm not using AI
to decide what medicines that
Yeah, no, I'm just, how, how, how is, might, you know,
is pharma using ai?
What does it look like? Yeah. What's the future?
I think we're, it, so we're looking into the future
as the minister spoke to, some of our systems are aged.
And so in order to really,
Okay. I think
In order to maybe leverage that at, at any kind
of high level, we would need to make changes in investments.
But at simple levels, I think everyone
has experienced this in their own lives.
We, we have had our health economics team looking at ways
to use it to better summarize some of our technical data,
make it more acceptable and readable to patients
and families
and the general public when we put out information.
So one of the pilots we have is just, um,
within our own group, seems simple,
but it's actually quite useful, is take technical data
and try to draft out a pa uh, family public facing summary.
And we've been just checking those
to make sure, are they accurate?
You know, we've, we've put them around to staff saying,
can you, can you pick out which one was written this way
or that, did it miss any information?
And then in terms of research
and evidence, I don't think we're there yet,
but our team uses some, some of it to help, uh,
but maybe not quite there as, you know, as, you know,
hallucinations that still go on in the AI world.
So I think what we're at the stage of is, is testing, check,
checking, and then using it for some really practical, um,
efficiency methods where we can,
that will help people understand what we do better. Yeah.
Dr. So Simplifying the comm really what I saying? Yes.
Some of it, yeah. The language
and then looking into the future and how it can be used.
Yeah. Okay. Thanks.
After promising this wasn't going to be an exam.
Yay. I'd like to, um, ask you
to help explain the graph in the annual report on page 58,
which I think is a really good story,
but I would like someone to take us through. It
Sounds like, Michael, this is, this is definitely a,
It's the price volume mix
of medicines in New Zealand over the last 10 years.
Oh, Yeah. Yeah.
It, It's, it's at a high level, it's trying
to depict where medicines are getting, is our,
our expenses going up
because of the, the expense of the medicine or
because of the volume of medicines that we're buying.
And then this index helps to quantify that.
So Adrian, do you wanna go? I,
I think that's helpful. I
mean, you can see the subsidy index, which is, um,
how much we're, how, how much
subsidy we are paying for medicines.
And you'll see that line trending down
and you'll see the volume index going up.
So you'll be seeing that we've got more volume, um, might be
because there's more people using more medicines.
Um, and then you can see the mix index
and see how that's tracking
and know that we've got subsidies going down
and we've got increasing volumes.
So it's great to see that we're able to balance that mix.
I'll try repeat that back to you.
Please tell me if I'm correct, the amount
that you are paying for a growing amount of medicine
in terms of volume is decreasing.
Is that, is that correct?
Yes. Yes. Yeah.
And so this is the way that, um,
absent funding increases, you can still get some new mm-hmm.
Because you saves a little bit, um, each year and still
Have growing Population Yes.
Growth in population, but also number of medicines.
Is that, is that right? Or they
Will be included in the mix?
Yeah. So it looks to me like some of the, um,
and one of the things I want
to understand is it looks like in recent years
that subsidy index has
reduced the rate at which it's decreasing.
Is that to do with any trends in the type of medicine
that you are buying?
Is it, is it biologics, making it harder
to get those sorts of Um, I don't have those details too.
Efficiencies, striving
Single point in the graph. Sorry. Yeah. There
May be a threshold we,
beyond which we can't go much lower in terms of the subsidy.
I, I think there could be too much in there.
We could get more information to you though. Yeah.
Thank You. Would That be
all right or should we send it to the committee,
if that's okay, and just unpack that a bit more team
and send that through for information sake.
And related question, um, I was reading the story
of the Young Innovator, um, in, um,
or maybe he's grown a bit older, um, uh, in Canterbury,
who's, um, uh, developed a form of recyclable, um,
consumable, uh, re yeah, recyclable.
And the point he made was that, um, one of a challenge
for him to get his product purchased as a medical device is
that evergreen contracts are used.
And I wanted to understand if Pharmac uses evergreen
contracts in relation to either medicines or devices
and what your approach is
and what the trade offs are
with whether you take the opportunity
to either get a new innovation or to save cost. Mm-hmm.
You'll be pleased to know he's, um, he's on the list.
Mm-hmm. So he is now, um, the hospitals are able
to purchase his products by the list they were always able
to purchase from him.
Yes. Um, but now that the comprehensive list is being done,
then that particular one is there.
Um, someone else can talk about, about the contracts.
I think, uh, we do use evergreen contracts
for both medical devices and medicines,
and I think the trade-offs, um,
there's different thresholds
and measures within the contract
to make sure we can still leverage, uh,
the best prices even within that.
So I think those parts are, are managed.
And then Adrian, do you wanna comment on
how else we manage the trade-offs with evergreen contracts?
Yes. To making sure we get new, new medicines. So within an
Evergreen contract, there may be some sub clauses of
that contract that may have,
Um, we may give protection from subsidy and delisting.
So we might say, we are gonna guarantee your product is
funded for up to X years, but
after that date, you no longer have that protection.
If we choose to do nothing to the product, it stays funded
and listed and you need to continue
to supply the medicine to New Zealand.
Or if we do something at the end of that protection period
that then we, the rights may be on us
to then delist their medicine as a result.
So while there are evergreen contracts that we use within
that, there's a number of controls to manage the length
of time a medicine may have, um,
prime position in the market.
All right. So it's not actually a forever contract then
The, the contract is evergreen
unless we do something to Right.
Okay. Yeah. And, um, I understand that
looking across the large number of medicines
that are purchased would take time and resource.
What's the approach to, um,
whether you review those contracts?
Do you work through some by supplier or by class?
What proportion of your portfolio can you
review? ESA,
We are always looking for opportunities within the
portfolio, and every portfolio contract manager
and therapeutic group manager
and the funding team will know when those periods
of price protection might be up.
We'll be constantly category planning
and working ahead to the future about when we may be able
to include a product and a commercial process.
So if there's price protection up at a certain point,
we'll know when that is and we'll plan for
that, um, in the future.
Thanks very much. And good.
I've just got a quick query about A DHD medication, um,
because we know that, um, prescriptions are going
to cha to change as there is more access
to people being able to be screened
and also a DHD, um,
medication consumers have different experiences
with different types of medication.
I'm wondering, uh, what your data
and evidence is telling you about both the current shortage
on Ritalin in particular
and the feedback from the communities as to
how they're responding to other medications
and whether the Ritalin shortage is something
that's temporary, or are you looking at, um, perhaps
sort of mainstreaming other forms of slow
and fast acting, um, a DH stimulant medication?
Yeah, I mean, I can, some I can summarize
and if you wanted more information, I think
The, The A DHD treatment,
especially the methylphenidate is global
and it's, it's not looking like it's going
to be completely resolved anytime soon.
So I think what the team's done is introduced new, new types
of medicine, and as we talked about the education package
that goes with that to ensure that we have as much,
uh, supply of alternatives
and some of these alternatives are more expensive than
what the methylphenidate contracts.
So we've built that into our budget to pay for that
and ensure that the, the transition is as smooth
as possible, um, to deal with the supply issues.
I think, you know, uh, certainly in in Canada
when where I came, this was the same, a similar issue.
So it's, I think the team is doing everything they can
and I, I really commend them on how much they've worked
with the community to make it as smooth as possible
and a challenging time with drugs that, you know,
affect kids Yeah.
And make it ch and make it difficult. I don't know. It's
A, it's a little bit like the, um, the, you know,
hormone patch question.
I guess in terms of the feedback from the community,
are people transitioning and finding that comfortable?
Are you getting feedback
that some people are not responding?
Well, it's just a, a bit of curiosity
because this has been in the media lately and concern
From an anxiety from people mm-hmm.
As well, you know, like it is.
Um, and sorry, I shouldn't interrupt you nearly,
but you know, part of it as well is that, you know,
they've been doing a lot of work with clinicians to say,
you know, particularly new people going on, can you try one
of the other brands so that we are protecting the supply
for the people that perhaps need it the most?
You know, so some of that education's going on,
but as, um, Natalie quite rightly says this is global.
Yeah. So that's in the top two of our main concerns
around supply issues.
And, and so my question's probably a systems one.
What, what systems have you got in place to get
that feedback to be able to make sure
that the supplier's going to the right place?
Go ahead. Because I know you guys have done a ton on this.
Yeah. So we regularly connect in the consumer groups
and also with the pharmacy groups
and mental health community with Health New Zealand, um,
to get feedback on how things are going on the ground
and if we need to do anything else.
The main feedback that we get from all of the groups is
that the information we put up on our website around
how much stock is available
of each different strength is the most
usable tool that they have.
So really proud of the team for being really transparent
and in as real time as we can be
with stock levels on each individual formulation,
it means a clinician can go to our website,
they wanna start someone on a particular formulation
of methylphenidate.
They could have a look on the website
and see is there a stock issue with that one or not,
and make an active decision with the patient
and their family about whether that formulation
or they try another one that there's plenty of stock with.
The other feedback we've had is
that bringing on some new formulations is really gonna help
because it gives some other options for people to try.
And we know, we do hear feedback from consumer groups
around, even when they've been on a particular formulation
of methylphenidate for some time.
Sometimes you people don't stay the same forever,
and you might find that these differences with wearing off
of medicine or they haven't got quite the right smooth
profile and they might wanna try a different formulation.
So with us bringing on a couple of new brands, it means
that we've just got that buffer.
We've got that extra ability for people
to have more choices in a time when supply is constrained
of the original brands that we had.
The other feedback we had was
that bringing Liz Dexamphetamine on board onto the schedule,
giving people another funded option has been really helpful
with supply issues and
We're expecting that, um, prescribing will go up
as the barriers to screening go down.
Are you confident that you have enough supply
and the right type of supply to be able to accommodate?
Yeah, so we, we actively made a decision
to delay the changes to the widening of access.
Um, and that was to enable the supply chain to be more ready
and have an increase in levels of stock to be able
to help with that demand.
And again, with us being really transparent
and sharing with everyone how much stock we've got
in a accessible format for them via our website,
that will help with making sure we can have people start on
the medicine they need when they need it.
Thank You. It's not just for a DHT. Right.
You know, sometimes I'll go, we've got approval,
we've done this, why aren't we?
And it's like, well, health New Zealand can't administer it,
you know, like, you know, so the,
the team do an amazing job at lining all of that up.
This the new line of questioning just on page 52 on the,
um, assessment of publications for exception
of circumstances, funding
and the time that those have been taken
between receiving them and, um, getting an outcome.
What are you doing to improve the, um, targets
and meeting targets that you set yourself when it comes
to being able to promptly, um,
move through those assessments?
It seems to me you gave us some
of those reasons about related to staff,
but that seems like then you're in quite a, like, I don't,
I don't if you're able to expand on
how many staff you have dealing with these
because it feels like Yeah, they just spike up.
Yeah. If you don't have enough staff. So
There's a, um, few things that are going on there.
Um, and, um, uh,
certainly the minister has made it very clear that, um,
for the work that we've been doing in the last sort of 12,
18 months, this is a priority now for him.
And as such, it's always been a priority for us.
And the context of that, um, certainly Natalie can speak
to it, but the team has doubled.
So the number of people that are working on it.
And then as, um, as kind of indicating
before as we look at the HTA, there'll be some medicines
that I think we'll be able to fast track through.
The other thing we don't do in New Zealand,
which I believe is really different than anywhere else,
is we don't put a, um, so we can ask for more information
and no one comes back to us.
And that can add six months to a year of us chasing
and trying to get that information.
That's, the clock keeps ticking, even though it's not us.
That's actually slowed down the whole assessment process.
So certainly the board has asked
for some work to be done on that.
Um, so that we're actually getting a, a true capture of,
you know, of how long it's taking
and how much of it is us and how much of it isn't.
Is there anything you want to add in there?
I mean, it's, it's, we,
the board are getting a report on it now monthly, because
From what I've seen in the in page to it,
it does seem like what you're capturing does not include the
time that maybe you're waiting
for someone to get back to you.
Mm-hmm. Um, and nonetheless, that has increased.
So with the doubling off the team, are you expecting
to shift your 20, 25, 20 26 targets to reflect
that increased, um, staff capacity?
Or are you gonna keep them to seven
Days? We're still getting some
work done on it.
To be fair, I think that it's been a 7% drop.
Um, that certainly wouldn't be good enough if I was,
if I'm sitting here in 12 months time to think
that 7% is, um, is good enough.
I, I would expect it to be significantly
more than that. Mm-hmm.
I, I think, so a couple of things
that we touched on earlier around the different parts of it.
Certainly understanding better, better reporting
to make the, the performance measure
more reflective of the work.
As you can see, there's a, there's a gap
between all applications in the most, uh, recent five years.
So we are making progress, but we're still tracking that.
And we have what I would call the tails, the end
of things that have been their way much longer than they
should be, that are also changing that, uh,
years in progress.
They may be low, they may be low priority, so they,
the high priority applications have kept going,
but they're still lagging in the, the timeline.
And so that's making them, that's causing some
of the long perceptions of the time.
But there, there's, again, even having said that,
even if we cleaned up our data
and reported better on how we're doing,
we still have major improvements to make.
And I think those come back
to the things we talked about earlier.
How do we expedite lower risk pro, pro, uh, applications?
Um, in some cases when we're waiting for suppliers
or others to come back to us, do we, uh,
take that out of the time?
It's not time that we're spending, uh, you know,
real conversations about where investments may or may
or may not be be needed and how technology can help us.
And that requires, we have a $7 million investment in data
and infrastructure that we're working on so that we can,
you know, have our pharmaceutical schedule up to date,
have better tools that people can work with that make some
of these processes easier, improved portals for, for
suppliers or others to submit applications to us.
Uh, all of those things I hope will start to change, um,
and then measuring it better to tell that story
as to where the improvements are.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Excellent.
Well, looks like members have, Asha has a question.
Um, just interested, not in any specific application
that has been made, but, uh, um, medicines for
Obesity. Um,
what does Pharmax see as the landscape
and at a high level, um,
how would they fear in an investment process?
What a, um, can you let us know about any thoughts you have
in, um, this area?
It's fascinating, eh, absolutely fascinating.
Um, and you know, we, we certainly, and,
and I know Margaret's, um, down to talk to, you know,
but at a, even at a high level and 'cause I can't help
but also look at it from society's perspective.
And so where's, I've actually asked the team for some, um,
advice from overseas as to those that are funding.
What threshold have they used?
Is it BMI, is it, you know, and,
and that will be interesting for the public to try
and get their heads around as well.
Um, the political discussion you're all gonna have is just
kind of fascinating in itself
because there's people out there
that believe you can still hear them on radio
that believe in, you know, societal
and, um, your lifestyle choice and mine.
And yet I'm the one that has to, um,
and hey, as someone that's been through weight loss surgery,
uh, and done it publicly, um, I've, I've sort of seen
and heard it, but equally you've gotta turn around.
And if we look at the, um, in the outlying costs to
our health system, to society, to people's lives,
to the type of lives they can lead, um,
actually reducing people's weight, in my opinion,
and I'm not a clinician, so I should just really put
that there as genuinely life changing
and investment saving for the country.
And if you're freeing up those hospital beds as, um, as,
as the team always tells me,
you don't actually free up a hospital bed, it's filled
that same minute.
Um, but equally, you know, you're giving access for, um,
for treatments for other things,
but goodness knows you're gonna say there's not
enough evidence out there yet. How you, Dr. Margaret?
Well, I'm going to say that the promise is so exciting
because, um, of the plethora
of long-term conditions that would be impacted
for the better if people could lose weight.
It's a, there's obviously a lot of subjective consideration
as well as the objective here.
Um, but I think a note of caution is that we don't know,
um, a lot about the long term, um, consequences
of taking these drugs.
We don't know about the dosing
schedules going out in the future.
So I think we can have some guarded optimism about the
promises of these and obviously scary costs,
but we just need to walk our way through this carefully.
And I would say this is where we need to be in, stick
with other jurisdictions that have similar approach
to the funding of medicines, um,
even if they might have a slightly
more generous budget than us.
Um, so yes, it's
Cautiously optimistic, but we currently publicly fund, um,
bariatric surgery Yeah.
For, you know, you know, um, I wasn't publicly funded
what I recall because here the haters can come out later.
But, um, but in that context, you know,
we do actually recognize the health benefits and savings
and, um, lifestyle changes.
And this is, this is an issue for many of our high needs,
um, populations and, um, sometimes some
of our population groups who don't have a voice
and there is a lot of stigma about weight and, um,
and so we are very mindful of the need to hear those voices
and, and, and,
and we'll see there's work to be done in this space.
Oh, sorry Ricardo, I just on that, um, have you already
developed or are taking this underway to make sure
that any consultation that you do
or decision that you make in relationship
to weight loss drugs, um, genuinely reflect, for example,
are, um, unique ethnic makeup with its own health, sort
of like, um, you know, profile?
Um, or are you mostly, as you mentioned, kind
of basing it off with overseas
Jurisdictions? Well, we're not even
there yet.
I mean, they're funded for certain conditions,
but not for the kind of, you know,
things we've just been broadly talking about.
But that is part of our considerations
for anything that we are doing.
Mm-hmm. So even if we are looking at overseas,
we still then have to put it
through a New Zealand population lens.
Yeah. Yeah. I guess it's a sideways supplementary question
just regarding the, um, medical devices available
for type one diabetes
and glucose monitoring versus type two,
and even listening to some of the media, uh, advocacy
where there seems to be a stigma associated with type two.
Where is decision making
and what are the criteria in terms of that kind of,
it feels like false divide for, for many
of those people who I think
Want To be able to access that?
I think we have to be very careful in
how we answered this question
because, um, well, no, I'm, I'm, you can tell me I'm wrong,
but I, we're just gonna be very true to our model
and our efficacy and our confidentiality as to
what we are doing and not give hope
to people if we are not even in the pro. Understood.
And I, I'm not, I'm, I'm not getting,
The question for me is really around, um, the fact
that it can sometimes be seen as a stigmatized debate.
And if there are other reasons for the decision,
it would be really in the public interest
and good for people's education
to understand why type one gets funded in type
two. And we, we
Had a, we had a funding application specifically
for type one from the suppliers,
and at that time the suppliers put in only funding
request for type one.
And I understand we've had a funding application
for type two and that's moving through the process.
There are a lot more people who would need type two.
So the funding considerations will be quite different.
Mm-hmm. Is that correct? Can do, are you able
to give us some of the numbers that are involved
in terms of the scale of
Cost? I, I
Don't have the, the details in terms of the numbers
of people that it might benefit,
but we can come back to you with that as part
of our assessment that those are the types
of things we would be looking at.
How many of the people was the health benefit,
what was the health need and what would the impact be?
And in terms of that social investment type lens,
will you be applying that to those considerations
because that would change potentially some of the funding.
We are still working our way through. Thank you.
What that looks like, what that formula is. Yeah.
So more and more we are using um, sort
of looking at the wider societal impacts.
Um, but we are, we are still in that kind
of learning stage of it.
We can't come back to you with costs,
but we can come back to you with numbers
because we don't truly know the
cost until we're negotiating. Mm-hmm.
Jenny, can I just ask a, a question with a,
looking at the geopolitical horizon
and in terms of, um, some of the narrative that's come out
of America in terms of, um, uh, statements
that have been made around, um, the potential
impacts it could have for the purchasing of pharmaceuticals,
is there any consideration that pharma is doing around what
that might look like when we go out
and say we're gonna get the best price ever?
How will that impact, um, potentially for New Zealand
On, uh, yeah. Well
we are looking all the time, so, um, certainly
around supply issues, looking at tariffs,
looking at the geopolitical and what might be happening.
Um, usually we sit there and just go, we don't know.
You know what I mean? Like, who knows?
'cause it changes so quickly
and so continuously, you know, tariffs
and supply are the biggest ones, you know, um,
I'm just be careful on what I say, you know,
not everyone loves the pharma model
because we negotiate and we negotiate heart.
Yes, that's right. That's, you know, um,
and so in that context, let's just keep
our heads down and keep going.
I sure. Just going back to the comment about
GLP one agonists
and the long term, um, evidence that's true.
One of the problems with constrained, um, funding
for medicines in New Zealand, um,
and I remember I was starting an HIV medicine when this was
an issue, as a constrained funding means we don't get new
technology in a timely way
and we never have all the long term, um,
information about a drug when it comes to, comes to market.
Uh, so here's a new class of drugs
or, um, what's the right way to balance that,
that, um, desire to get new technology available
to New Zealanders quickly.
Maybe that is where
the social investment approach would yield
an opportunity for us.
That's very early days in our modeling of, um,
how we would measure the benefits
of a social investment approach.
That's probably all I can say on that,
apart from the obvious clinical benefits.
But that might be the argument in terms
of another opportunity
to have these drugs before in New Zealanders. Mm-hmm.
And, and the question is kind
of also why do other countries move faster than we do?
Because they, you know, and is that
because we've got limited funding?
And so, you know, we we're trying to weigh up all the time,
but you know, when I sort
of hear there's not enough evidence, not with the GRPs
by the way, that's not um, at all,
but you sort of go, well, why has it been funded in eight
other like-minded countries then Yeah, I don't know.
I'm asking the question when
I'm supposed to be answering them
Just on that. Would, would
it be fair to say that in some cases good
clinical guidelines and sort
of clinicians actually being able to then move forward
with the use of those drugs is also a way to make sure that
we can access new technologies
and medication while ensuring clinicians are empowered to,
In the model we have for the purchase
and supply of medications, the place of
clinical guidelines is down the line when we are funded, uh,
we do have the clinician voice, the expert clinician voice
and the more, more general clinician voice at the level
of therapeutic assessment with our PTECH committee.
And I think we could be clever in that way,
but I think the guidelines piece comes a little bit further
down the line.
Um, the ministry of course also has clinical input into its
policy settings and meds safe with its regulations.
So there is a lot of clinical input.
Just a very quick sur um, when I'm hearing, and Dr.
Vera's questioning your responses,
something about the appetite for uncertainty
and how we measure these things in the long term.
Mm-hmm. Are there currently constraints in the rules,
regulations or other policy type settings
that prevent you from being able to build that?
Or is this simply a case of how you build this model?
In my, and I can look at the team,
then they can correct me if I'm wrong
and my understanding is no.
Mm-hmm. And so ultimately, you know,
by regulation we have to have ptac.
So we've got a technical advisory committee,
obviously then we've got subcommittees within that.
It is, um, and we are currently looking, you know,
if we are looking at how we're doing consumer
and patient, you know, um, now
how we doing clinicians is they keep saying to you
how we using them quite differently.
Mm-hmm. Um, it's really interesting sitting there, which
by the way, most of it goes over my head
because it's so technically dense,
but how they make decisions, who has got more
of a risk appetite, how deep they go, very deep by the way.
Mm-hmm. When making a decision about a medicine.
Like, um, like they're given a lot of information from,
from our, but then they do do their own research as well.
Um, and when they're making that decision, they sort
of have a lead clinician, if you like, that then goes
through it with everybody else.
They've all done pre-reading, which was extensive.
So the uncertainty is a clinical, what weight do they give
as a clinical consideration?
Clinical GLP one. I think that in terms
of social investment.
Social investment, more
or more what you were saying, uh, well, sorry,
the risk appetite for not having the evidence is
where I was going with that.
Yes. And, but sorry, that as a clinical decision.
As a clinical decision, which is probably appropriate.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Alright. Members, Fascinating.
Are people nodding at me? Oh, good. Right.
I told them if I'm wrong, tell me.
Thank you very much for your time here today.
I've had you in here for a number of hours.
Appreciate everyone who's said to participate.
Thank you members for your questions. Thank you.
And the way you went about it, Al, thank you. Got
It. Thank, thank you very
much Mr. Chair.
Thank your questions and
all right.